[Music]
so for those of us that are in the
business of getting customers for our
companies 2023 has been a really really
hard year from hiring freezes budget
cuts layoffs macroeconomic headwinds it
seems like every card that we're getting
dealt this year is From a stack deck of
all bad cards
but
um your CEO and your CFO might have
asked you to as a marketer or as a cro
to cut down on the spend try to retain
some more budget slow down the
burn some of the things that you might
have done already is cut out
questionable campaigns that wasn't so
hard you didn't really believe in these
things anyways you can get some of these
campaigns down retain some budget no
skin off your back you might have slowed
down on hiring and only hired for some
key spots that you had or perhaps Frozen
hiring
altogether maybe some of the cutting
that you had to do had to go really deep
and you've had to get rid of some really
good campaigns that you believed in that
consistently got you good customers in
any case you probably did away with any
ambitious growth plans that you had for
2023 you just resigned yourself to tread
water and try to survive and most
difficultly some of you might have been
asked to let staff
go so you are operating with fewer
resources than you had in the past
potentially with a smaller team than you
used to have in the past but the
expectations from your CEO from your
board they haven't gone anywhere you're
still there to grow the company you're
still there to find customers and find
ways to
sell something that I've been pondering
on is has the operating mode that we've
been in the past couple of years has it
actually been counterproductive to
getting deals done or at least getting
deals done
efficiently uh if you take a look at the
first half of data dog ver this year
versus last year you can see that we
actually did spend just under 4% Less in
terms of marketing spend while at the
same time we got more than 20% more
marketing qualified leads for our sales
team and it's not just that the
composition of the leads changed also
and this is not something that's easily
expressed through numbers but our sales
team has consistently said that the
leads that they're getting now are much
much better than what they used to get
in the past so there is a way there is a
way forward to keep on getting more top
of funnel that turns into more deal
even if you're spending
less so in this era of constrained
resources and even though the recession
that's been forecast has has not
happened or at least not happened yet it
doesn't seem like this operating mode is
going to change anytime soon there are a
couple of toolkits that are essential to
not just survive but to thrive in this
current macroeconomic
environment first of all is
prioritization you only have a limited
number of shots maybe you just have one
shot and you have to make sure that that
shot's going to count that you are
investing time money and effort in the
right thing or the right few things that
you want that you feel truly are going
to give you more customers the next is
efficiency there isn't this endless
supply of resources like it might have
felt like in the past what you have is
what you have and if you squander the
input for your Sales Machine you're not
going to get that back and lastly
pragmatism even if it didn't work there
was always the illusion that you could
throw money out a problem maybe there
was some high powerered consultant or
some other kind of Magic Bullet solution
that is off the table now and you're
essentially going to have to break out
the duct tape in order to get some quick
fixes done to keep your sales
going so diving into prioritization now
most of this is going to be about how
sales can help influ sorry how marketing
can help influence sales but I think it
takes uh a little bit of time to dive
into what's going into the sales engine
to begin with what is the input what is
the raw
material the first question that you
might want to ask yourself
introspectively is are you really are
you consistently giving your sales team
great leads with high conversion
potential and by this I mean is it the
right people are they the right
companies are they the right people from
the right companies are these companies
that surisa are currently experiencing
the kinds of problems that your product
or solution helps
resolve
so going back to how we were able to get
more leads and higher quality leads this
is a what I think is a pretty good
visualization of the quality spectrum of
the leads that were coming in before
2023 and then after 2023 if you look at
the top bar over there if you were to
you know really ask me how I thought
about certain campaigns things would
have broken down into three General
buckets there were our great campaigns
that kept on giving us leads that very
readily turned into sales that I felt
amazing about and on the other end of
the spectrum there was a whole bunch of
leads that honestly were kind of
questionable I mean on paper they look
good but I didn't really feel good about
them there were some questions around
there the sales team didn't seem as
ready to call on these leads and
somewhere in the middle there was a
spectrum of what I would call good leads
of course we got the ask to cut down on
spending and we opened up that pocket in
the middle of good leads and it turned
out that some of those good leads with a
little bit of tweaking whether was on
the campaign side or whether it was
additional enablement that our sellers
needed were actually great leads and
there was a dividing line once you
declare those good lines to be those
good uh leads to be great leads and
anything past a certain quality level
honestly was it worth the time from the
marketing campaigning staff and also the
salesperson's hours and the budget that
was being spent honestly spoiler alert
it wasn't those campaigns were just not
worth it so we asked all of that and we
just kept those great leads that we
found and we found ourselves all of a
sudden with almost a bonanza of
resources because we had cut out a
number of campaigns even more deeply
than what we had been asked to cut we
actually had some budget available now
and potentially even more importantly we
had more marketing uh person hours
available to work with as well and
another really interesting thing
happened also which is that it wasn't
just us that were cutting down the spend
it was almost every single other company
in the market which meant that all of
the platforms or all of the vendors that
we had been working with for our
campaigns all of a sudden needed more
business as well bids went down on
social media platforms and also on
search engines so we were able to uh
essentially spend the same or maybe even
spend more and get more leads out of it
and a lot of our vendors that previously
had maybe put a cap on how much they
were going to work with one single
customer were all of a sudden open to
doing more business and we were able to
lock in better rates and get more
business done so we were able to double
down on our Great lead sources and
actually produce more great leads and
based on our experience that Bottom bar
of fewer leads but really really quality
leads is a cohort that's more conducive
to getting customers than the top bar
where you have more volume one last
thing that happened which was a surprise
to me and a very pleasant surprise was
all of a sudden again people had more
time and they knew that resources were
finite and we weren't going to be able
to spend on as many things as we were
before it unlocked a huge amount of
creativity and it almost felt like a
Renaissance with a lot of our marketers
who had been doing great work before
they found another gear they had uh
these creative ideas come to them it was
almost like they needed the shortage in
order to be able to access that
Ingenuity that had always been there uh
lying uh uh
latent the next question to ask going
once again to what's going into the top
of the funnel are are you marketing kpis
and your cost attribution metrics taking
deal progression into
account let's dive into a quick example
just to illustrate the point so here we
have two very different kinds of
campaigns to bring in leads Facebook and
trade shows Facebook the leads are
relatively low cost about $100 a pop but
these are Anonymous people that are
coming to you that don't really
necessarily know your company over the
internet if you look on the other side
everybody knows that trade shows are
very expensive
uh they're time intensive you have to
send a lot of people over for every one
lead that you get from a trade show you
can essentially get five Facebook leads
for the same cost but these campaigns
are not exactly created equally the
thing is at the trade show you meet that
person in person they see you they
remember you you have a conversation
perhaps you even start the beginning of
a deal while they're at your booth on
the trade show floor so when you look
into the next stage of that conversion
funnel in meetings it takes a lot fewer
trade show leads to turn into a meeting
and your cost per meeting is
significantly lower potentially from
this channel that from a per lead basis
was a lot more expensive assuming that
opportunity rates are the same which
they're probably not that also means
that your opportunities are going to be
significantly cheaper even if The
Upfront cost was a lot more one other
thing to take a look at is are you
looking at leads only or are you looking
at accounts as well many of us in
marketing are gold on volume of people
on leads if you get one lead from one
company or a 100 leads from the same
company for the marketer they're going
to go for the 100 that's amazing great
results but for the salesperson it is
the same company and that's the only
company that they can do a deal with
sure having a couple of extra people to
call on might help get that deal going
faster but at this at the end of the day
they're only going to probably be able
to get one deal out of that and if you
were to Pivot all of your cost
accounting on an account basis you might
actually find that a lot of your
programs that you thought were great are
not performing as well economically as
you thought they were the last little
caveat here is that some channels you
can control for which accounts come in
and some you can't Facebook and trade
shows are actually two channels where
whatever wants to come in comes in other
kinds of campaigns that oftentimes are
even more expensive like field events uh
are ones where you can actually control
which accounts do come in and and make
sure that you get that account basis
going so let's zoom out and see this
example all the way through here we have
a company with a $1.2 million marketing
budget just for Simplicity sake let's
say that every channel maxes out at
$500,000 you can't spend anymore if you
want to maximize for leads you're going
to go for Facebook which is the cheapest
let's say you throw in some Google and
then you cap it off with some trade
shows and that gets you the most amount
of leads that you're going to go for if
you have good uh cost metrics that look
at down funnel statistics
you're going to Pivot and do a different
mix starting out with trade shows as
they're the cheapest per meeting look
maybe moving into Google and then
rounding out with Facebook there wasn't
space to put an additional chart here
but if you have Quantified your
opportunity level costs you're going to
do an even different mix and you're
going to max out trade shows and then
field events and figure out between
Google and Facebook what you want to
spend on when you take a look at all of
these different maximization points
whether it's leads or meetings or
opportun ities and assuming that the win
rate is more or less the same uh for all
of these channels which again is maybe
not the right assumption for what you
all see in real life the maximum amount
of leads that you get which is the uh
the um leftmost column over there is not
necessarily going to be the point where
you maximize your deals so lead
maximization doesn't always equal deal
maximization because there might be
different attributes that come from
those specific channels another
important note here is that this
particular uh exercise might be
completely different for different
geographies different sizes of companies
different product lines even different
sales teams so sometimes you have to Z
zoom in and look at a per team basis and
lastly even though the stats might show
one thing you have to really guttery
believe that the stats on paper are
what's reflective in the real world at
data dog for instance we believe that
there's a huge amount of variability
that can happen from an initial meeting
to an opportunity being created so we
actually trust that meeting stat that we
feel is pretty uniform across products
and across geographies and we keep our
eye on the opportunity metric but we
don't trust it for
decision-making the last question to ask
from a prioritization perspective is
when are enough leads enough now if
you're sellers or have you worked with
enough sales teams out there salese can
never have enough leads but as a
marketer I'm going to tell you that that
is not the truth because there is a
saturation Point salespeople have a ton
of things to do if they're doing their
job right every single day they should
be prospecting into leads they should be
following up on your own leads they
should be involved in every step of a
deal once an opportunity gets going they
need to be doing deal reviews they're in
training there are so many things that
need to happen and when a sales rep time
is fully booked up if you give them more
leads they're not going to have the time
to work on them or at least work on them
thoroughly which means you should be
reallocating your budget and your sale
your marketing teams
time in order to make sure that teams
that have capacity are the ones that are
really benefiting from the leads so
jumping into efficiency in our world of
constrained budget resources and
potentially constrained Staffing what
you get is what you get and you have to
make hay out of
it there are four distinct areas where
marketing is involved in the sales
process number one is when leads are
handed off from the marketing team to
the sales team number two is when sales
people take those leads and actually
take action and try to reach out number
three is when they book meetings and
number four is when they create
opportunities if there is a leak if
there is a hole in any one of these
handoff steps it is literally like there
are nuggets of gold that are falling out
of a bucket never to be found again
going into the E of the unknown and
there and those leads are definitely not
going to turn into deals so it is
incumbent to figure out how your
conversion rates are in every stage here
and as a mark marketing team ensure that
the leads that you have so painstakingly
worked to get to the sales team are
being acted on and are all having a good
chance of turning into
deals to give an example of how each
conversion step improving the conversion
rates can have an outsize impact on your
Le on your deals let's take two
scenarios here here on the pre- 2023
column is a marketing team that was
producing a th000 qualified leads per
month budget cuts came in they had a
pull back on certain campaigns 25% of
that lead generation capacity has gone
away because of the constraints that the
company has had to abide by to be budget
conscious so now post 2023 that
organization's only getting 750 leads a
month pre 2023 three out of every four
leads made it to sales reps it's not bad
it's the majority most leads are making
it over and then three out of every four
leads that made it to a sales rep got
called on one out of 10 of those leads
turned into a meeting which honestly if
you think about it these are all
qualified people that rate should be
higher and one out of four of those
meetings turn into opportunities you had
a win win rate of about 25% so from a
thousand leads that went in four deals
came out maybe it's not the best
conversion rate overall but there was
more budget if you needed more deals you
just put some more money into lead
generation and put more deals in the
funnel and more or less at this rate you
get some deals out but let's go over to
2023 as I mentioned before many of us
have not had our goals uh retired or or
or decremented because we have less
budget we're supposed to be getting more
deals potentially than in any other year
so that first step leads routed it's
really weird that one out of every four
leads is not making it to a seller if
you were to up that rate to 95% and
honestly it should be 100 you're almost
at parody with the amount of leads that
were going to your sales team before
that next step leads action uh let's say
that you were able to get it from 75 to
90% your AC actually beating your number
from the previous year more leads are
still in play to turn into deals The
Next Step meetings booked you're able to
make your sales team a bit more
responsive to prospects and able to turn
more of those leads into meetings and at
15% you're almost double the amount of
meetings booked now in this new paradigm
of less spending than you were last year
let's say that you're able to get
opportunities created you're starting to
get almost to a 3X improvement over the
last year and even if the macroeconomic
envir environment has meant that winning
a deal gets harder that's okay you can
bear the brunt of it and in this
scenario with a tighter set of
conversion metrics you've actually
gotten yourself more deals with sign
with potentially significantly less
budget so let's double click into each
one of these areas to figure out how to
help out Ma and maximize everything
number one lead routing are all of the
leads that are being generated actually
getting to the right reps some key kpis
to look at here are unassigned leads how
many leads are completely open and don't
have a sales owner leads and cues often
times leads go into a holding queue
while some additional business logic or
some manual intervention is going to
have to work in to figure out which rep
should work on it and of course open
lead aging might point to a lot of
problems but one problem it'll
definitely highlight is when your leads
are getting jammed up in routing and
they're not making their way to the
right rep this is at its heart usually a
systems in an operation issue which
means that there are systems and
operational fixes kpi development if you
aren't looking at these particular
metrics I really think you should and
then instituting instituting a recurring
managerial meeting with marketing and
sales leadership and potentially company
leadership to find where there are
issues troubleshoot them and try to
resolve these problems there might be so
many small little issues going on that
are hard to pinpoint that you might want
to take a full-time employee at Great
cost of course and dedicate them
completely to making sure that all leads
go to their intended recipients which is
exactly what we did because we couldn't
figure out one major problem it was
Death By A Thousand
Cuts one issue which is pretty
straightforward and seems really silly
in in in the aftermath but was an issue
was that the lead routing engine had
been set up to route based on inferred
language so that meant that anytime that
Portuguese came up as the language from
that lead all of those leads would go
over to the queue for the Portuguese rep
we only found out about it because the
Brazilian team was saying hey we're not
getting any leads and looking at our
stats they were getting tons of leads
all of those Brazilian leads were going
over to the Portuguese rep who was a
little bit confused as to why he was
getting Brazilian leads but hey he had
his leads too if leads are staying open
for a long time something is probably
broken that needs to be identified and
fixed so you've been able to
troubleshoot where your leads are
getting held up and why they're not
making their way over to the sellers now
the next question is are all of your
leads getting worked on because honestly
they should be the key kpis to Institute
our lead actioning rates as well as lead
rejection rates and rejections are
interesting because honestly not every
lead that you bring is going to be
qualified to sell to if lead rejection
rates actually start to go down it might
mean that your leads are just not
getting followed up with and of course
having rejection reasons are important
because as before if there's a campaign
that's not working out you want to know
exactly what that campaign is to
discontinue it and reinvest that budget
somewhere else this is at its hard and
operational set of issues so some quick
lowcost fixes are to engineer a CRM
dashboard for every rep where any leads
that are open in their name are right in
front of their face as soon as they log
in every morning to get followed up with
those should get rolled up to team
specific reporting so that you're able
to once again set up an oversight
meeting with Sales Management and
potentially your CEO and your CFO and
figure out which teams are not following
up on leads and why not you might also
want to Institute an SLA a lead needs to
be followed up with in x amount of days
and if it's not it can be clawed back
and given to another team that would
gladly follow up on that lead and lastly
if if you have an SDR or a bdr team a
team of people that is tasked with
opening up people and getting meetings
you might want to consider if you're not
already having that team be the main
contact uh area for the new leads that
come in quick double click of of an
issue that we came up against here's a
sales team that's following up on just
over half of the leads that we've so
painstakingly and with so much budget
gener generated for them and when we ask
them why are you not following up on the
leads they come back and they say you
know what a lot of those leads that you
got us they're rotten the people that we
called on they'd never heard of us
before we don't want to call on those
leads why why are we going to waste our
time when we actually took a look under
the covers there was a couple of lead
sources that these leads were coming
from trial signups the Reps knew were
good almost every single one of them was
getting followed up with same thing with
trade show scans but we were spending
money on third party content syndication
programs that were continuously bringing
us good names from the right companies
at face value they look like the right
people but the salespeople would call on
them and these individuals that had
gotten some asset from some random
thirdparty website had no idea who we
were we cut that campaign out we
reinvested the funds in campaigns that
would get us more trial signups and
maybe some trade shows and all of a
sudden we had a team that was following
up on all of its leads if leads are not
getting action for some reason there's
probably something broken that needs to
be identified and
fixed next down the path is meeting
conversion
do leads pick up the phone and want to
talk to your team at expected rates this
is mainly a training issue uh that where
reps might not know how to speak the
right language to to prospective
customers or might not understand what
customers are looking for the key stats
to look here are meeting rates and again
cut by different teams or GEOS or
products and if you have the bandwidth
start sampling emails and Salesforce or
if you have gotten a sales listening
tool like gong set up start doing some
random sampling of gone calls what you
find might be an unpleasant surprise but
one that's also easily fixable through
some lowcost fixes that mainly have to
do with training it's possible that your
marketing automation platform is feeding
a ton of great contextual data that your
reps have no idea where it is or how to
use it a little bit of training there
might help get more targeted emails you
might want to run a demo certification
program and maybe even follow that up
with a first call or a first email
workshop with a certification as well a
rep should be able to to do a 5 to 10
minute basic demo of the product answer
basic questions and have a really good
understanding of the use cases that a
prospect is trying to solve and as much
as possible use your own customers words
to contact more potential customers
something about the phrasing of how
customers say things is not imitatable
by anybody inside the company usually
and even if these aren't formal case
studies that are hard to get approved
and take a lot of work up just getting a
recording that's ke kept internally and
transcribing it and taking some of those
quips might make all the difference for
opening up a prospect to have a
conversation here's a quick case study I
get about a hundred of these emails a
day and I kid you not almost every
single one of them looks like this
honestly it's terrible if you take a
look at the subject line I have no idea
what this thing is about you might find
this interesting find what interesting I
don't know if you take a look inside
this individual wants me to click on
some link for some random article which
is like the first thing that anyone
that's taken a security class about how
to avoid fishing scams knows to not do
this person is talking about something
in financial services which is
definitely an industry that I've never
ever worked a day in and like I don't
even know what this thing is about
unfortunately if you start doing some
sampling of emails and calls from your
own sales team you might find that these
kinds of generic Communications might be
the norm and a lot of your sellers are
sounding like this or looking like this
when they reach out to a prospective
customer now compare that here is an
email that I got that got an instant
response back and honestly I barely ever
respond to stuff the i i flagged this
email because it was so good and I get
so few of them the subject line I know
exactly what this is about turn
Anonymous visitors into ident into
identified named Enterprise accounts
that is the problem that I suffer from
every single day this person definitely
knows about our company they know a bit
about me they're very succinct in
telling me what they do and they even
answer my first question which is okay
that's an interesting solution how do
you do it this got an instant response
back and we were in a demo probably
within a day if you can get your sales
team to consistently hit the nail on the
head for a prospect with Outreach like
this those meeting rates should go up
dramatically and lastly in the last
piece we marketing can help sales get
better attainment is opportunity
creation can your reps recognize
potential deals this is a pretty basic
stat and it's also one that has a lot to
do with training opportunity creation
rates and cut by team or product or by
Geo as much as possible um going back to
training one of the things that you can
do from a marketing perspective is build
a use case taxonomy a family tree of the
reasons why people will open up their
checkbook and write a check for your
product and work backwards from there
Build A playbook for every single branch
of that family tree and potentially a
certification path does every single rep
know how to chase a use case that is
being sought after and get a deal done
you might want to also sample meetings
that didn't turn into opportunities to
see if there's something that you missed
or potentially a whole set of use cases
where your sales team is not trained
well enough so as a quick example here
we can take a look at everybody around
you we're all here at a trade show now
what are reasons why people buy tickets
to trade shows one is they might want a
day out of office all right that one's
pretty straightforward they might want
to be at a session like this one and
learn a thing or two they might want to
go to the expo hall and explore new
Solutions or maybe scope out a
competitor or one big reason why people
go to trade shows is they want to
network they want to meet peers they
want to potentially meet investors
advisors get a new job if you go to
almost every single website for a trade
show there's a lot of information about
sessions there's a ton of information
about what sponsors are going to be
there in the expo hall but very few of
any trade shows make public who's coming
to the show so again if you are a sales
rep and you're trying to sell trade show
tickets there is going to be a fair
amount of people that are coming in
trying to network that you won't have
the resources to be able to sell tickets
to unless that list is available
ultimately if a seller can't sell
against a use case opportunities for
that solution area are just not going to
materialize so lastly pragmatism there's
no magic bullet there probably never was
but when you had a much larger budget
you could at least entertain the fact
that there might be so here's a couple
of solutions that are low or no cost to
the organization or at least no more
outlay but might come with some
organizational
difficulty which is why the past years
so many of us have been essentially
throwing money to try to solve problems
but these will help you get more deals
done with less budget if you've
identified leaks in a conversion step
but sales leadership isn't
prioritizing uh plugging up those leaks
uh there are plenty of marketing
full-time employees that might have a a
part to play to double click and start
to roll out solutions to plug up that
hole improve conversion rates and use
those resources use that bu budget a lot
better in order to be able to get more
deals potentially some sellers or some
sales teams don't want to change their
processes and they don't want to do new
things well you've got limited budget
which is the problem that we've been
talking about from the beginning if a
sales team doesn't want to efficiently
make use of the resources that are given
to them you might want to limit or
remove any marketing budget or attention
that's being given to that particular
sales team getting stats out is
challenging or they're in systems that
your team doesn't own you might be able
to get an extract of the raw data which
although it's going to be super hairy
and hard to go through a couple of days
diving deep into the data and trying to
get a baseline or assess if the
solutions that you're putting in play
are actually working are going to be
well worth the time based on the amount
of budget that might literally be
disappearing into nothing because the
leads are not getting followed up with
to turn into deals and then lastly you
might have identified a fair amount of
enablement assets that need to be
produced but it's so many It seems
impossible to get them all done well
we're blessed with some amazing tools
that can make this pretty quick video
chat or video uh conferencing with a
recording function usually turns into a
transcript and we now have these amazing
generative AI tools that are really good
at cleaning up a mess of text a couple
of hours of phone calls with experienced
people from your organization cleaned up
by chat GPT might give you all of the
enablement materials that you need to
make some pretty big steps and
conversion rates for your team and you
might not even have to polish them up
that might be enough the knowledge is
all you need whether they look good or
not doesn't
matter so to sum everything up a lot of
us have been pushed to spend spend spend
higher higher higher up until recently
but marketing budget is not the only
factor for getting more customers
there's a lot more and I think that a
lot of us have been a bit blinded by the
fact that we need to spend so much
budget to get these eye popping campaign
stats out and have not focused as much
on trying to optimize for getting deals
out of that raw
material so if you remember this talk
when you're back at your desk and you're
going to take only one action from all
of this try to measure your down funnel
conversion statistics that marketing can
influence again and those are our leads
getting routed properly our leads
getting actioned our meetings getting
booked and are opportunities being
created and you might find that there is
a world of optimization out there that
you can very pragmatically and quickly
solve for that will allow you to get way
more deals on way less budget
thank you all very
much